we begin with the escalating crisis in
the Middle East Iran and Hamas are
accusing Israel of assassinating hamas's
top political leader Ismael hania they
say Wednesday's air strike in the
Iranian Capital tan will not go
unpunished Hardline protesters took to
the streets vowing revenge and
denouncing Israel and the
US Israel's prime minister Benyamin
Netanyahu has not specifically spoken
about the attack in tan but says there
will be severe consequences for anyone
who attacks his
Nation there are challenging days ahead
of us since the attack in Beirut threats
have been heard from all sides we are
prepared for any scenario and we will
stand United and determined against any
threat Israel will exact a heavy price
for any aggression against us on any
front over to our correspondent Tanya
Kramer in Jerusalem Tanya Netanyahu did
not speak about an Israeli role in Han's
death what was his message
tonight well he gave this short
statement to the nation just shortly
after a very lengthy security cabinet
ended he was speaking there from the
military headquarters in Tel Aviv and as
you said he didn't acknowledge the
strike in Teran which had killed Hamas
political leader isma hania but he
talked about that he had dealt Iran's
proxies a crushing uh blow but it was
essentially a message tonight uh to the
Israeli public to Garner support but
also to prepare them what he said will
be challenging days ahead as the country
now braces for retaliation uh by Iran
and its proxies following those strikes
in Beirut and tan and as we just heard
he said that Israel was facing threats
from across uh the region and that is it
is ready for any scenario
we know that Iran has blamed Israel for
the strike against hania we know that
they vowed revenge for the strike how
worried are people in Israel about
retaliation well I think the country is
really on high alert and it's a bit of a
of a strange atmosphere because when you
come here and during the day you know it
is as almost like normal life but when
you talk to people in conversations
there is a worry uh you know about the
retaliation and what such a retaliation
could look like there have been reports
uh in the media uh saying that Iran will
or or might consider to strike uh
directly uh back uh at Israel and there
are certain scenarios that are being
discussed now obviously it could be a
strike that would uh entail also all uh
of Iran's proxies like a coordinated
attack now we've seen something like
this uh in April when uh Iran la launch
drones and missiles at Israel but this
is seen as that it could be much much
more forceful so we are talking about
potentially uh drones and missiles uh
from Iran from Lebanon from Iraq from
Syria from Yemen uh uh launched at
Israel uh so and uh of course there's
also the question what the targets will
be whether this will be uh mainly
military targets will there be civilian
targets uh it could be that uh Tel Aviv
or Hy will be uh hit so all of this of
course is on people's mind while people
are thinking here you know this could be
really that the region is on a brink of
a wider escalation and the conflict is
intensifying what does heas killing mean
for efforts to negotiate a ceasefire in
Gaza and to secure the return of the
remaining
hostages well I think isma hania was
seen as one of the uh key figures in
these negotiations as someone from Hamas
abroad he was involved in those
negotiations so there is a big question
mark here about what will happen to
these negotiations we also heard from
Qatar one of the main mediators
alongside uh Egypt who has qu condemned
uh this killing and also questions how
uh this will go forward and this is of
course also in the mind of many families
here those who have still uh their
relatives in Gaza there are um over a
100 hostages that I still believe to be
in Gaza and of course there's a lot of
worry here uh what will happen to them
now negotiations were kind of stuck that
they were continuing there were just not
any result as of yet but now it seems
unlikely that they will uh um start
anytime soon DW Tanya Kramer in
Jerusalem thank
you is hania's killing and the assass
assassination of a top Hezbollah
Commander have prompted pleas from world
leaders world leaders rather for
restraint and while motivation for
killing the Hamas leader may stem from
the group's October 7th Terror attacks
in Israel the animosity toward Hanah
goes back long before
that Ismael Hanah greets Iran's new
president in what would be one of his
last meetings just hours after attending
the president's inauguration he and his
body guard were killed in a strike on
his residents in
tan hania was the political face of
Hamas the militant islamist group that
carried out the October 7th Terror
attacks on
[Music]
Israel Han had not lived in Gaza for
several years but ran Hamas from qat
where he lived in Exile he became the
Palestinian prime minister in 2006 and
continue to rise through hamas's ranks
eventually becoming its political Chief
in
2017 hamas's Gaza leader Yahya sinoa is
believed to have been The Mastermind of
the October 7th attacks while hania
represented Hamas internationally and
moved around the region for diplomatic
meetings he was a key player in
negotiations to stop the fighting in
Gaza some fear his killing will be a
major setback to achieving peace in the
region hania's death came just hours
after Israel said it killed senior
Hezbollah commander fuad shukur in
Beirut the attack also kills at least
one woman and two children and wounded
dozens Israel says it targeted shukur in
retaliation for a rocket attack on a
soccer field in the Israeli occupied
Golan Heights that killed 12 children
and
teenagers Israel blamed Hezbollah and
warned the militant group it would pay a
heavy price shukur had been one of
hezbollah's leading military figures
since it was established by Iran's
revolutionary guard more than four
decades
ago after the Israel Hamas war broke out
on October 7th shukur was accused by
Israel of being behind many of the Drone
and missile attacks that Hezbollah
launched against is
Israel shukur is the most senior
Hezbollah Commander to be killed since
2016 when Mustafa bad Rin the group's
military commander in Syria died in an
explosion in
Damascus global leaders fear the deaths
of two senior leaders of Israel's
greatest enemies when tensions were
already at Boiling Point could now
prompt an allout Regional
[Music]
War Alex vatanka is director of the Iran
program at the Middle East Institute in
Washington DC and joins me now for more
Alex welcome to the show hania was
killed in a high security Guest House of
the Revolutionary guards on a day when
security was extra tight because the new
Iranian president was being inaugurated
how humiliating is this strike for the
regime in
tan oh it's really difficult to describe
how bad this is I mean this could not
have been worse um this was a senior
member of the so-called axis of
resistance of Iran someone that Iran has
been cultivating ties with as we just
heard in the segment uh since 2017 and
earlier than that and for him to show up
into Iran feeling uh you know well
received and he was but protected he
wasn't and that is uh to your question
Stephen very humiliating for for the
Iranian regime but I might quickly add
this is maybe the most high-profile
assassination by Israel in in in recent
memory uh but it's not the first I me
there if you go back a decade and a half
Israel has engaged in many successful
sabotage and assassination attempts on
Iranian soil and the Iranian regime for
whatever reason just can't stop it I
want to ask in a moment what that
humiliation means for a Counterattack
but first do we know how much of the
Iranian security apparatus has been
infiltrated by
Israel obviously it's impossible to tell
in terms of where the problem is this is
a country with over a dozen of
intelligence Services uh many of them
that are Rivals of one another just to
give you an example the ministry of
intelligence notorious for its rivalry
with the intelligence branch of the
Revolutionary guards there is sort of
competition jealousy and so forth how
much of that is in the way of sort of
looking for these uh agents that are
essentially working for foreign powers
mosad I would have to assume is one of
the best um in terms of having
infiltrated the Iranian security and
intelligence communities and they have
good reasons for it here is the Islamic
Republic that for 45 years has promised
to bring about the end of the state of
Israel so the the Israelis including
their intelligence services are highly
motivated to go after um Iranian uh
officials Iranian policies and doing so
by recruiting Iranians and it looks like
they're recruiting Iranians at the
highest level of the Iranian regime what
does that mean
psychologically for this Iranian
security apparatus and for their ability
um to achieve their aims when they're so
riddled with these kinds of Agents these
counter
agents right one of the first things
that struck my mind when I was writing
about it this morning is as we're
speculating about how quickly and how
big Iran's retaliation will be against
Israel and supreme leader Ali has come
out and in so many words said there will
be a retaliation and I'm sure there will
be a retaliation but when we question
that how quickly they're going to
retaliate and how big they're going to
retaliate this is what we need to keep
in mind the Iranian regime knows is
entirely infiltrated I mean mosad was
able I'm assuming mosad did this
although Israel hasn't taken claim for
it the the floor on which is Han was
sleeping at right uh this wasn't an
operation done by satellites or
listening to phone conversations on
mobile phones this
required topnotch human intelligence
meaning you have people in the Iranian
regime that are working for the Israelis
providing information
and that means if I was thinking
logically if I'm Iran I must then guess
or second guess my next steps in terms
of what should I do if I go big against
Israel what do I not know in terms of
where else they are infiltrated what
else they could do to stop me in my
tracks and I think that might just
create some slower reaction from Iran
than a lot of commentators in the west
right now are assuming will be the case
that humiliation that we spoke about
earlier perhaps that need to save face
does it make a response from Iran even
more
dangerous look I mean the Israelis back
in April hit the Iranian Embassy in
Damascus that was crossing a red line
they killed two senior Iranian generals
the Iranians again were humiliated and
for the first time K publicly came out
and said we have to do something now
Israel's up the anti even more now
Israel has killed a senior member of the
a of resistance someone who had just
hours ago met the Iranian supreme leader
had been in the Iranian Parliament met
all the senior officials Israel's
message is very clear that he's got a
Long Reach and they could have killed
kame they could have killed anybody by
the looks of things so I mean look I
don't think the Israelis uh in terms of
their strategy are sure from what I can
tell what they want to achieve well one
thing they did want to send in terms of
a signal to Iran is you have come to us
by supplying his Bala Hamas the houthis
and others with missiles and drones that
are attacking us and you've been sitting
away 2,000 kmers thinking you can just
watch the show but guess what we're not
bringing it to you that seemed to be
what the Israeli calculation is also
about do you think the CH the chances of
containing this conflict this regional
conflict have dramatically changed in
the last 24
hours look there's more pressure today
than it was uh just a few days ago no no
doubt about it but I always go back to a
simple question I ask myself as an
analyst when Iran is doing that basic
cost benefit analysis is a regional war
in Iran's interest and the answer to
that to to that question for me is
clearly a no Iran would not benefit from
a regional War a regional war will drag
the United States into that conflict and
will risk the survival of the Islamic
Republic and that is the most precious
of of policy they have on their agenda
all right that's Alex fatona with the
Middle East Institute thank you very
much thank
you Laura Blumenfeld is a Middle East
analyst a best-selling author and a
former senior policy adviser at the US
state department where she focused on
the Middle East peace process Laura
welcome to the show two of Israel's most
senior enemies killed within 24 hours
can we say to what extent the US
government Israel's biggest Ally was
caught off
guard well you know the United States
whatever they're saying publicly this is
very complicated and challenging for
them we're looking at everything through
the prism of a presidential race and
vice president Harris is running on the
theme of Freedom versus chaos well their
major Ally in the Middle East is pretty
much a kingdom of chaos right now with
these toppling of you know what they
call the Twin Towers of
terrorism what what does this these
killings these two killings but
especially hania what could that mean to
the uh attempts to get a ceasefire going
in Gaza something the US government has
been very invested in in recent
months yeah I mean it could go either
way on the one hand you could say this
this win for Netanyahu kind of gives him
that symbolic victory that he needed to
make the concessions uh to reach a
ceasefire and the same can be said of
Hamas that they've kind of been softened
d by these military attacks and kind of
beaten into submission um which was
netanyahu's approach all along on the
other hand you could say no Hamas is
just going to go into lockdown they've
got nothing to lose as long as they hold
those hostages those souls in their
hands they hold the key cards hania has
also been described as a Hamas official
who was interested in a ceasefire
agreement How likely is it that his
successors will see things in the same
way I I mean it's interesting strategy
right shoot the messenger I me I've
known hania for decades the last time I
spoke to him um he was actually laughing
uh bitterly because he was talking to me
about the last time the Israelis had
tried to assassinate him um he was
sitting at lunch and the ceiling started
raiding down paint on his head because
the Israelis had dropped a quar ton bomb
on his house rather than a on- ton bomb
and so he escaped um there's always a
replacement I can't tell you how many
Hamas leaders I've met with and then
months later they were gone um so I
don't think that it'll really have a
huge impact because senoir really was
the key interlocutor he was the decision
maker for this deal Laura I want to ask
you where we go from here but first
let's listen to what the US Deputy
ambassador to the UN said today at the
UN Security Council it is best not to
speculate on the impact that recent
events May have on peace and Security in
the Middle
East a broader war is neither imminent
nor
inevitable first of all we know that
this killing of hania was a major major
event especially when we compare it
against the Hezbollah commander who was
killed the night before do we have any
idea how Iran might
respond you know I I went to Iran and
spoke to the Grand Ayatollah years ago
about the concept of retaliation and
revenge and how you respond to an
injustice and what he said to me it's
very very specific according to Islam
the key though about revenge is that the
the the response is often greater than
the original offense and that's why they
had this prescription from the elders
one grave opposite one grave so what
would that mean in this case does it
mean that they would go after a diplomat
an Israeli leader maybe you know a
diplomat um in Western Europe for
example or does it mean they go to the
heart of Israel the way that Israel
theoretically anyway they have an it yet
but struck in the heart of of Iran in
tahan does that mean an attack on Tel
Aviv I mean time will tell it's coming
and it's coming soon at the same time we
know that in April we saw an exchange of
direct fire between both countries after
Israel targeted an Iranian official in
Damascus but neither side seemed really
interested in an escalation could we not
see something similar
here well there was a very choreographed
carefully choreographed retaliation here
there's an extra element which is
humiliation I'm Iran was embarrassed
hania was their guest he was in their
their their their sort of VIP guest
house so I think that there's this
element now though where you need to
sort of restore you know restore um the
balance of sort of honor and it's a
matter of personal respect I think
that's why the you know the the the um
the leader of Iran declared raised the
red flag of Revenge and said there will
be Justice and a price must be paid all
right Laura Blumenfeld thank you very
much
thank you